                                          Unit 8. Deployment


    -   In both cases, these general-purpose materials need to be supplemented with
        training materials that are specific to an organization’s context. For example, part
        of a literacy programme could involve teaching learners how to read specific
        documents, such as data cards or system cards.6
In short, a literacy programme must spread information about how AI works, about the
risks and opportunities it creates, and about the legal obligations that follow from the use
of AI. This training module is designed to support the latter.
After the literacy programme is designed, it must be kept up to date. Given the fast pace
of technical, social, and legal developments surrounding AI, many things can change
quickly. Among other developments, tasks previously thought to be impossible might be
solved by new AI models, the public opinion might turn against some applications of AI.
Conversely, changes in the interpretation of data protection requirements might require
changes to how an AI system is used. This means that not only the curriculum for AI
literacy must be updated with some frequency, but that people might need to undergo
regular training sessions. AI literacy is not, at least for the time being, a fire-and-forget
practice.

Session 8.2. Data subject rights in the context of AI

 By the end of this session, learners will be able to describe some of the
 obstacles created by AI to the exercise of data subject rights and discuss
 whether those can be addressed by organizational measures.

One of the distinctive approaches of EU data protection law is that it grants individual
rights. The data subjects whose data is processed gain certain rights they can invoke
against the controllers of that processing, laid down in Articles 12–22 GDPR. Those
rights are applicable to the training and deployment of AI systems whenever such
practices use personal data, as discussed in the previous units. However, the peculiar
technical characteristics of AI have some implications for how those rights can be
exercised in practice.
The transparency rights from Articles 13–15 GDPR will be examined more closely in Unit
11 of this training module. In the following paragraphs, we examine other data subject
rights granted by the GDPR.
Restricting and objecting to processing in AI systems
The GDPR grants to data subjects two rights that allow them to affect how data
controllers process their data. Under Article 18 GDPR, data subjects have the right to
restrict the processing of their personal data if one of the listed conditions apply. Article


6 See Session 10.1 of this training module.


                                                 134
