4.5.2016           EN                          Official Journal of the European Union                                       L 119/53

     2.   The communication to the data subject referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall describe in clear and plain
     language the nature of the personal data breach and contain at least the information and measures referred to in
     points (b), (c) and (d) of Article 33(3).

     3.   The communication to the data subject referred to in paragraph 1 shall not be required if any of the following
     conditions are met:

     (a) the controller has implemented appropriate technical and organisational protection measures, and those measures
         were applied to the personal data affected by the personal data breach, in particular those that render the personal
         data unintelligible to any person who is not authorised to access it, such as encryption;

     (b) the controller has taken subsequent measures which ensure that the high risk to the rights and freedoms of data
         subjects referred to in paragraph 1 is no longer likely to materialise;

     (c) it would involve disproportionate effort. In such a case, there shall instead be a public communication or similar
         measure whereby the data subjects are informed in an equally effective manner.

     4.   If the controller has not already communicated the personal data breach to the data subject, the supervisory
     authority, having considered the likelihood of the personal data breach resulting in a high risk, may require it to do so
     or may decide that any of the conditions referred to in paragraph 3 are met.


                                                             S ec ti on 3

                            D at a p ro te ctio n im p a ct a s ses sm ent a nd p r io r co nsu ltati o n

                                                              Article 35

                                               Data protection impact assessment

     1.    Where a type of processing in particular using new technologies, and taking into account the nature, scope,
     context and purposes of the processing, is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of natural persons,
     the controller shall, prior to the processing, carry out an assessment of the impact of the envisaged processing
     operations on the protection of personal data. A single assessment may address a set of similar processing operations
     that present similar high risks.

     2.   The controller shall seek the advice of the data protection officer, where designated, when carrying out a data
     protection impact assessment.

     3.    A data protection impact assessment referred to in paragraph 1 shall in particular be required in the case of:

     (a) a systematic and extensive evaluation of personal aspects relating to natural persons which is based on automated
         processing, including profiling, and on which decisions are based that produce legal effects concerning the natural
         person or similarly significantly affect the natural person;

     (b) processing on a large scale of special categories of data referred to in Article 9(1), or of personal data relating to
         criminal convictions and offences referred to in Article 10; or

     (c) a systematic monitoring of a publicly accessible area on a large scale.

     4.    The supervisory authority shall establish and make public a list of the kind of processing operations which are
     subject to the requirement for a data protection impact assessment pursuant to paragraph 1. The supervisory authority
     shall communicate those lists to the Board referred to in Article 68.

     5.   The supervisory authority may also establish and make public a list of the kind of processing operations for which
     no data protection impact assessment is required. The supervisory authority shall communicate those lists to the Board.

     6.    Prior to the adoption of the lists referred to in paragraphs 4 and 5, the competent supervisory authority shall
     apply the consistency mechanism referred to in Article 63 where such lists involve processing activities which are
     related to the offering of goods or services to data subjects or to the monitoring of their behaviour in several
     Member States, or may substantially affect the free movement of personal data within the Union.
