                       Law & Compliance in AI Security & Data Protection


covered by the existing regulations on medical and in vitro diagnostic devices.9 So, they
would meet this first criterion.
The second condition for the application of rules on high-risk AI comes from product
safety law itself. Under Article 6(1)(b) AI Act, an AI system is classified as high-risk if the
product in which it is used must undergo a third-party conformity assessment before
being placed on the market:
    1. In the case of DigiToys, the company has decided that such an assessment is
       necessary due to the nature of their products and the lack of technical standards
       applicable to smart toys,10 which means they also become subject to the AI Act’s
       rules.
    2. In the case of InnovaHospital, classification is more contextual, as the applicable
       regulations have a complex mechanism for determining which applications
       require third-party assessments.
But, whenever a device without AI would need such an assessment, the use of AI
means the rules on high-risk systems become applicable.
Risks to public values
Many of the high-risk applications covered by the AI Act have no precedent in product
safety law. Article 6 AI Act stipulates that all systems listed in Annex III AI Act are high-
risk, unless they are covered by one of the derogations present in Article 6(3) AI Act.
Scholars and civil society organizations have pointed out that there is no underlying
logic to this list of high-risk applications. It reflects, instead, applications that the EU
lawmaker saw as creating particular risks to public values, in particular the protection of
fundamental rights, democracy, and the rule of law.
The AI Act’s recitals offer guidance about the risks that the lawmaker associated with
some—but not all—of the applications listed as high-risk. But, for the most part, the
determination of which risks apply in each context is left to the deployers and providers
of those systems.11 Therefore, those actors need to know whether they systems are
covered by one of the various rubrics of Annex III AI Act.
AI systems posing a high risk to fundamental rights
Annex III to the Act indicates eight types of application considered as high-risk:
    1. Biometrics, in so far as the use of AI is permitted under EU or national law.
    2. Operation and management of critical infrastructure.
    3. Education and vocational training.
    4. Employment, workers management, and access to self-employment.

9 Regulations (EU) 2017/745 and 2017/746.
10 Article 19 Directive 2009/48/EC.
11 Articles 26 and 9 AI Act, respectively.


                                              83
