4.5.2016           EN                          Official Journal of the European Union                                          L 119/51

     (d) the categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been or will be disclosed including recipients in third
         countries or international organisations;

     (e) where applicable, transfers of personal data to a third country or an international organisation, including the identifi­
         cation of that third country or international organisation and, in the case of transfers referred to in the second
         subparagraph of Article 49(1), the documentation of suitable safeguards;

     (f) where possible, the envisaged time limits for erasure of the different categories of data;

     (g) where possible, a general description of the technical and organisational security measures referred to in
         Article 32(1).

     2.   Each processor and, where applicable, the processor's representative shall maintain a record of all categories of
     processing activities carried out on behalf of a controller, containing:

     (a) the name and contact details of the processor or processors and of each controller on behalf of which the processor
         is acting, and, where applicable, of the controller's or the processor's representative, and the data protection officer;

     (b) the categories of processing carried out on behalf of each controller;

     (c) where applicable, transfers of personal data to a third country or an international organisation, including the identifi­
         cation of that third country or international organisation and, in the case of transfers referred to in the second
         subparagraph of Article 49(1), the documentation of suitable safeguards;

     (d) where possible, a general description of the technical and organisational security measures referred to in
         Article 32(1).

     3.    The records referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall be in writing, including in electronic form.

     4.    The controller or the processor and, where applicable, the controller's or the processor's representative, shall make
     the record available to the supervisory authority on request.

     5.    The obligations referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not apply to an enterprise or an organisation employing
     fewer than 250 persons unless the processing it carries out is likely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of
     data subjects, the processing is not occasional, or the processing includes special categories of data as referred to in
     Article 9(1) or personal data relating to criminal convictions and offences referred to in Article 10.



                                                               Article 31

                                          Cooperation with the supervisory authority

     The controller and the processor and, where applicable, their representatives, shall cooperate, on request, with the
     supervisory authority in the performance of its tasks.


                                                              S e cti on 2

                                                   Se cur it y of pe r so na l da t a

                                                               Article 32

                                                       Security of processing

     1.    Taking into account the state of the art, the costs of implementation and the nature, scope, context and purposes
     of processing as well as the risk of varying likelihood and severity for the rights and freedoms of natural persons, the
     controller and the processor shall implement appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure a level of
     security appropriate to the risk, including inter alia as appropriate:

     (a) the pseudonymisation and encryption of personal data;
