                               Unit 10. Fairness and Accountability


is, techniques that allow one to understand the technical factors that guide a system’s
decision processes. But, as we discussed in Session 4 of the module, opacity is not
solely a technical problem: there are also legal factors that prevent the release of
information about an AI system. And sometimes technical complexity is even
instrumentalized to prevent the release of information about an organization’s
practices.1 As such, those technical measures for transparency need to be supported by
accountability measures that ensure an organization’s decisions on how and what to
disclose can be evaluated.
We now examine three issues that are relevant for accountability when AI systems are
used to process personal data. Session 10.1 discusses how various kinds of software
documentation can assist organizations in demonstrating compliance with data
protection requirements. Session 10.2 deals with a specific kind of document that is
sometimes required by the GDPR: the data protection impact assessment. Finally,
Session 10.3 discusses how data controllers can responsibly pursue fairness in AI
systems.

Session 10.1. Documenting technical decisions

 By the end of this session, learners will be able to distinguish between the
 various roles of technical documentation and map elements that are need for
 documentation to support accountability.

Large software projects are often accompanied by various kinds of technical documents.
Those documents are drawn up in response to several needs, such as:
    -   Registering and explaining strategic decisions for later implementation.
    -   Supplying technical detail about what has been done within a system, to facilitate
        future updates and maintenance actions.
    -   Guiding the potential future users on how they operate an AI system; or
    -   Demonstrating how the system complies with software requirements.
Those needs often require vastly distinct types of documents. The level of detail that is
adequate for a software developer learning about a system is likely to be too complex
for an operator who just needs to understand what the system does and how to use it.
Yet, each of those documents can be relevant for different data protection tasks.
In line with its technology-neutral approach,2 the GDPR mostly refrains from prescribing
specific types of documents. In some cases, as we will soon see in Session 10.2, the
proper deployment of an AI system might require a data protection impact assessment.
However, the GDPR focuses on expressing the contents that must be supplied and not

1 See, among others, Busuioc et al. (2023).
2 Recital 15 GDPR.


                                               164
