                                           Unit 8. Deployment


This judicial understanding is not necessarily a big shift in the application of the law, as
many data protection authorities were already following this approach (Barros Vale and
Zanfir-Fortuna 2022). Still, it requires caution from organizations using AI to make
decisions that involve personal data.12
If a certain application of an AI system counts as automated decision-making for the
purposes of the GDPR, its controller must ensure that one of the three legal bases
above is applicable. If that is the case, the ensuing processing remains bound by the
general requirements from the GDPR. Additionally, processing based on items a or c of
Article 22(2) GDPR—that is, on consent or on contract—must ensure that the processing
adopts measures that protect the rights, freedoms, and legitimate interests of the data
subject. According to Article 22(3) GDPR, those measures must include “at least the
right to obtain human intervention on the part of the controller, to express his or her point
of view and to contest the decision.”
This requirement can be relevant to the training and deployment of AI systems,
especially those meant to replace humans in decision processes. Any organization that
controls a system designed for decision-making purposes, or that repurposes an
existing system for that end, should check whether the system’s output counts as
automated decision-making.13 If so, they will likely need to designate specific individuals
to interact with data subjects and handle their requests for human intervention,
expressing their point of view, and contesting the decision.
Contrastingly, Article 22 GDPR is unlikely to be directly applicable to processing in the
training process of AI models and systems. This is because each processing operation
during the training process does not produce a significant effect on the data subject.
Nonetheless, developers of AI systems planned for decision-making should be aware
that their buyers will likely need to comply with these requirements. As such, these
buyers could benefit from systems that incorporate design measures that facilitate the
operation of those rights.14
Once again, the AI Act offers extra detail to these obligations when it comes to high-risk
AI systems. Under Article 14 AI Act, providers of high-risk AI systems are required to
adopt technical measures that facilitate oversight. They must build the system in a way
that allows the persons overseeing it:
   (a) to properly understand the relevant capacities and limitations of the high-risk AI
   system and be able to duly monitor its operation, including in view of detecting and
            addressing anomalies, dysfunctions and unexpected performance;


12 The use of special categories of personal data in decision-making is further restricted, as per Article

22(4) GDPR.
13 On evaluating controllership, see Session 6.1 of this training module.
14 On some potential measures to that effect, see Unit 12 of this training module.


                                                    138
