                                    Unit 8. Deployment


of sanctions, including “algorithmic disgorgement,” that is, the mandatory deletion of
models that are not compliant with the law (Li 2022; Hutson & Winters 2024). Such a
measure has not yet been deployed by data protection enforcers in the EU, and it is
likely a measure of last resort against reiterated non-compliance.
Several measures have been proposed as technical and organizational alternatives to
full-blown model deletion. Some of those are meant to delete data from the weights of
the entire model, thus allowing its removal after the model has been trained (see, e.g.,
Bourtoule et al. 2021). Others try to make deletion feasible by changing how the model
is trained. For example, the CPR technique (Golatkar et al. 2024) allows a model to rely
not just on its core training data, but also on a private data store that can be instantly
forgotten.
Those techniques are still at an early stage of development, and as such they might not
be mature enough to meet all the legal requirements established in the GDPR (Cooper
et al. 2024). Still, a data protection professional will need to engage with the software
developers to understand whether such a technical approach is feasible in the case at
hand.
The right to data portability
Article 20 GDPR equips data subjects with a right to data portability. If the outputs of an
AI system qualify as personal data, a data subject has the right to request their
portability. Likewise, the data subject has the right to request portability of personal data
used as an input for an AI system. In both cases, the connection of the data with the AI
system does not introduce any additional complications if compared with other kinds of
portability.
The same cannot be said about the portability of the weights of an AI system based on
machine learning. Given that, as discussed above, information is often spread across
weights, it can be difficult to associate specific weights with a natural person. Even if
such an identification is possible, the weights within a neural network are specific to that
network’s architecture. As such, they cannot be simply “plugged into” another network.
However, that transplantation of rules might be feasible in other kinds of AI systems. For
example, rules codified into an expert system might be implemented in another system if
the same variables are available. Therefore, a data protection professional will need to
consult with the technical team to determine whether the inner workings of the model
embed personal data in a format that can be ported. Future guidance by data protection
authorities will bring more clarity in this regard.

Session 8.3. Automated decision-making and AI
In this session, we will continue the previous discussion on data subject rights by
focusing on a specific right: the right not to be subject to an automated decision. Under

                                            136
