                                  Unit 5. Inception Stage


   5. Access to and enjoyment of essential private services and essential public
      services and benefits.
   6. Law enforcement, in so far as the use of AI is permitted under EU or national law.
   7. Migration, asylum, and border control management, in so far as the use of AI is
      permitted under EU or national law; and
   8. Administration of justice and democratic processes.
Within each point, the EU lawmaker has designated one or more applications
considered high-risk. Any other applications within that domain are not classified as
such. For example, the use of AI for risk assessment in pricing in relation to natural
persons for life and health insurance is covered under Point 5 above. By exclusion, risk
assessment and pricing with regard to the insurance of legal persons or of other types of
insurance for natural persons is exempt from the rules on high-risk AI. So, the rules on
high-risk AI under Annex III only apply to a narrow set of applications designated as
especially risky.
Derogations from the high-risk classification
A system might escape the rules on high-risk AI even if it is designed for a listed
purpose. Article 6(3) AI Act stipulates that a system is not considered high-risk if it does
not “pose a significant risk of harm to the health, safety or fundamental rights of natural
persons”. In general lines, this derogation covers situations in which the AI system plays
only a marginal role in the outcomes. As currently formulated, this is the case whenever
one of the four conditions below applies:
    a. The system is intended to perform a narrow procedural task, such as
       automatically archiving the work done by a human.
    b. It is intended to improve the result of a previously completed human activity, for
       example by improving a report written by a human analyst.
    c. It is intended to detect decision-making patterns or deviations from prior
       decision-making, without replacing or influencing human assessment, for
       example by flagging whether a transaction involves a much larger monetary
       value than usual; or
    d. The AI system is intended to perform a preparatory task to an assessment
       relevant for the purposes listed in Annex III, leaving the assessment itself in
       human hands.
The examples listed above are merely indicative, as the degree of human involvement
in a particular case might mean that the derogation is not applicable. Determining its
applicability requires a contextual assessment. The only general rule in that regard is
that any system that carries out profiling in the context of Annex III applications is
considered high-risk, regardless of any subsequent human involvement.



                                            84
