                                        Unit 5. Inception Stage


            investigation is likely to uncover relevant data processing that needs to be
            addressed.
Classification uncertainties
Second, the data protection professional’s habitual diligence is particularly relevant
given the various uncertainties about AI mapped in Part I of this training module.
Despite the technical and social complexities of AI systems, the information obtained
through communication processes cannot be taken at face value. Instead, the
professional must carry out a dialogue with the technical experts within the organization
(and at the external providers) to evaluate the legal implications of the systems being
analysed.
For example, a department within an organization might say that their new tool is an AI
system in order to secure extra funding or to gain prestige from using advanced
technologies. But, upon further inspection, their system might not meet the AI Act’s
criteria for an AI system.6 Or, conversely, an individual software developer within an
organization might want to avoid mentioning their use of AI in a project in order to avoid
having to deal with internal compliance requirements before a project is mature enough.
So, any information about a supposed AI system must be thoroughly verified before it is
added to the inventory.
Keeping the inventory up to date
Third, the inventory must be updated often:
    1. Even if an organization does not develop its own AI systems (or develops just a
       few of them), its data processors might decide to use AI for some reason. In the
       UNw example, OfficeCorp’s business decision to use AI was taken without prior
       notification to the university, which would only find out about it after the new AI
       systems were implemented.
    2. Some AI systems that were originally listed can be deactivated.
    3. The legal classification of an AI system under the AI Act might change over time.
       For example, Article 7 AI Act allows the European Commission to update the list
       of high-risk AI systems.
An inventory that is not verified from time to time might lose its usefulness or even
become a misleading guide to AI in an organization.
Public or private inventories?
Fourth and finally, the organization must decide how much it wants to disclose the
inventory. If an inventory is made accessible within the organization (or even to the
public), departments and individuals might feel more inclined to supply information and

6 See Unit 1 of this training module.


                                                  80
