                        Law & Compliance in AI Security & Data Protection


    (d) the specific risks of harm likely to have an impact on the categories of natural
  persons or groups of persons identified pursuant to point (c) of this paragraph, taking
         into account the information given by the provider pursuant to Article 13;
 (e) a description of the implementation of human oversight measures, according to the
                                   instructions for use;
 (f) the measures to be taken in the case of the materialisation of those risks, including
          the arrangements for internal governance and complaint mechanisms.
A careful read of the list above suggests a considerable overlap with the impacts to
fundamental rights covered by a DPIA. To a lesser extent, the same can be said of
HRIAs. While there is no single list of elements required by a HRIA, as the
methodologies are chosen based on business requirements, they all cover the impact of
AI systems on human rights, which include the fundamental rights outlined above.
It might be possible in some cases to offer a single report that covers all the points
required by data protection law and those human rights-focused instruments. Even if
that is not the case, much of the work done in the elaboration of the DPIA will be
relevant for drafting those reports. Hence, the DPIA, the FRIA, and the myriad forms of
HRIA should not be seen as competitors, but as allies in the shared goal of producing
trustworthy AI.

Session 10.3. Pursuing fairness in AI technologies

 By the end of this session, learners will be able to outline a data protection
 impact assessment for an AI system or model and combine that assessment
 with other assessments that might be required by EU law.

Fairness is a critical concept for AI. Many of the problematic uses of AI technologies we
discussed in Unit 4 can be ultimately traced to the unfair impact that the use of AI has to
individuals in those circumstances. Furthermore, Article 5 GDPR establishes fairness as
one of the guiding principles of personal data processing.18 For all the widespread
agreement that fairness matters, it can be exceedingly difficult to pin down how exactly it
matters and what we should do about it. In this session, we will examine how to find the
substance of the legal duties of fairness under the GDPR.
We will not examine here the definitions of fairness metrics. Learners interested in those
technical details would be well-advised to consult the companion training module. 19 This
session discusses, instead, some factors that data protection professionals must



18 On that, see Session 6.3 of this training module.
19 Enrico Glerean,   Elements of Secure AI Systems.

                                                       171
