                   Law & Compliance in AI Security & Data Protection


keep it updated. Additionally, the availability of this information can generate value for
businesses. As an example, the Brazilian judiciary has a list of AI models developed by
each court, allowing other courts to benefit from tried-and-true solutions rather than
creating their own system from scratch. Those benefits of transparency, however, might
be outweighed by other organizational factors, such as the need to preserve trade
secrets.

Session 5.3. The purposes of AI technologies

 By the end of this session, learners will be able to assign different AI systems
 to the various legal frameworks established by the AI Act.

Once a data professional knows what AI systems and models are used in an
organization, they can start assessing the organization’s data processing architecture.
Each system or model is used for one or more tasks, which often involve distinct kinds
of personal data. Additionally, those systems are often interconnected, in the sense that
the output of one system can act as the input for another. For example, InnovaHospital
might use an AI-based solution to analyse the data generated by the interactions
between patients and the hospital’s chatbots. It is necessary, therefore, to have a sharp
vision of the function and the interactions between existing AI systems and models.
Here, it is important to distinguish between two kinds of purpose that are relevant here.
On the one hand, each AI system or model is designed for a purpose, that is, for
carrying out one or more specific tasks. The system or model’s purpose is relevant for
determining the rules applicable under the AI Act. On the other hand, those systems and
models might also process personal data, either during their training process or during
their operation. As such, the purposes of each processing operation become relevant for
the application of data protection requirements to the system. It is now time to examine
those two kinds of purpose. The purposes of data processing will be examined more
closely in other units of this training module. Now it is time to look more closely at the
legal classification of purposes for AI systems and models.
Models and systems are subject to different legal frameworks under the AI Act.
However, as discussed in Session 1.2 of this training module, all those frameworks are
organized around the purpose for an AI model or system. General-purpose models—
which can be used to power systems designed for various purposes—are subject to
special rules, some of which apply to every general-purpose. If a model can only be
used for a specific purpose, then it is not directly regulated. Still, conformity with the
rules that apply to an AI system in light of its purpose might require changes to the
model powering it. So, one must determine why an AI system is being used in order to
find out the applicable rules.



                                            81
