                  Law & Compliance in AI Security & Data Protection


Exercise 2. Which of the following is a non-functional requirement for an AI system?
a. A chatbot must answer 90% of questions correctly.
b. A diagnostic tool must outperform human doctors.
c. A recommendation system must provide personalized suggestions.
d. A translation model must support five languages.
e. An AI system must adhere to GDPR's data minimization principle.


Exercise 3. Why might an AI inventory be critical for organizations?
a. A complete inventory might allow an organization to avoid applying the GDPR to
some of its less relevant systems.
b. To centralize all AI-based decision-making into one system.
c. To identify AI systems and ensure compliance with legal obligations.
d. To minimize stakeholder involvement in AI decisions.
e. To protect trade secrets from external review.


Exercise 4. When might an AI system used for one of the AI Act’s high-risk purposes
escape the additional obligations established in the Act?
a. When it only performs narrow procedural tasks, without conducting profile.
b. When it promotes fundamental rights.
c. When it uses machine learning algorithms that are not advanced.
d. When it involves profiling in law enforcement contexts.
e. When it operates with minimal human supervision.


Exercise 5. When analysing a contract for the provision of an AI-based service, what is a
data protection professional likely to focus on?
a. The cost-effectiveness of the service.
b. Whether the AI model powering the service reflects the technical state of the art.
c. Whether the provider of this service controls their own technology controls the
intellectual property used to provide it.
d. Whether the provider supplies enough information for the organization to comply with
its own disclosure duties.
e. Whether the service is compatible with an organization’s existing tools for data
processing.




                                           87
