                                 Unit 5. Inception Stage


lawful at a first glance, different purposes raise different risks to data protection
principles and other values protected by the law. As such, the purpose for which a
system (or model) is built or used affects the legal duties to which a provider or deployer
must comply.
Some of the risks created by AI might be anticipated early on. To do so, the previous
sessions have highlighted a few good practices:
   1. Creating and keeping updated an inventory of AI systems within an organization.
   2. Involving various stakeholders within an organization in the process of keeping
      that inventory up to date.
   3. Evaluating the contractual terms under which popular AI tools are offered.
   4. Helping business stakeholders identify potential implications for data protection
      of the requirements they are mapping for an AI system.
   5. Using the inventory to evaluate whether a system interferes with (or is interfered
      by) other systems within the organization; and
   6. Assessing the purposes of AI systems before they move on to the development
      stage.
After completing those preliminary tasks, and organization should have a much clearer
picture of what they use AI for and what needs a new system would address. This
suggests that involving a data protection professional at the earliest stages of AI
development can help organizations avoid not only legal liability for breaches of the law
but also the duplicated work that would come from redundant or even unlawful AI
projects.
For the data protection professional, this early assessment process also contributes with
visibility of the AI systems and models that will process personal data within the
organization. Furthermore, classifying those systems in accordance with the AI Act is
important to understand whether and how the general data protection obligations are
modified by any AI-specific obligations. In the next stages of the AI life cycle, we will
focus on the various data protection obligations that emerge throughout the life cycle.

Exercises
Exercise 1. What is the primary purpose of the inception stage of an AI project?
a. Conducting real-time data processing.
b. Determining the organizational need for AI and its specific requirements.
c. Deploying AI systems in various departments.
d. Collecting as much personal data as possible.
e. Analysing the final output of an AI model.




                                            86
