4.5.2016           EN                          Official Journal of the European Union                                          L 119/45

     3.   A data subject who has obtained restriction of processing pursuant to paragraph 1 shall be informed by the
     controller before the restriction of processing is lifted.



                                                              Article 19

            Notification obligation regarding rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of
                                                       processing

     The controller shall communicate any rectification or erasure of personal data or restriction of processing carried out in
     accordance with Article 16, Article 17(1) and Article 18 to each recipient to whom the personal data have been
     disclosed, unless this proves impossible or involves disproportionate effort. The controller shall inform the data subject
     about those recipients if the data subject requests it.



                                                              Article 20

                                                     Right to data portability

     1.   The data subject shall have the right to receive the personal data concerning him or her, which he or she has
     provided to a controller, in a structured, commonly used and machine-readable format and have the right to transmit
     those data to another controller without hindrance from the controller to which the personal data have been provided,
     where:

     (a) the processing is based on consent pursuant to point (a) of Article 6(1) or point (a) of Article 9(2) or on a contract
         pursuant to point (b) of Article 6(1); and

     (b) the processing is carried out by automated means.

     2.    In exercising his or her right to data portability pursuant to paragraph 1, the data subject shall have the right to
     have the personal data transmitted directly from one controller to another, where technically feasible.

     3.    The exercise of the right referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be without prejudice to Article 17. That
     right shall not apply to processing necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the public interest or in the
     exercise of official authority vested in the controller.

     4.    The right referred to in paragraph 1 shall not adversely affect the rights and freedoms of others.


                                                             Se cti on 4

                            Ri ght to ob je ct a nd a ut om a te d ind ivi dua l de ci sio n-ma ki ng

                                                              Article 21

                                                           Right to object

     1.    The data subject shall have the right to object, on grounds relating to his or her particular situation, at any time to
     processing of personal data concerning him or her which is based on point (e) or (f) of Article 6(1), including profiling
     based on those provisions. The controller shall no longer process the personal data unless the controller demonstrates
     compelling legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests, rights and freedoms of the data subject or
     for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims.

     2.   Where personal data are processed for direct marketing purposes, the data subject shall have the right to object at
     any time to processing of personal data concerning him or her for such marketing, which includes profiling to the
     extent that it is related to such direct marketing.

     3.   Where the data subject objects to processing for direct marketing purposes, the personal data shall no longer be
     processed for such purposes.
