4.5.2016           EN                           Official Journal of the European Union                                      L 119/47

     (d) the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
         including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security;

     (e) other important objectives of general public interest of the Union or of a Member State, in particular an important
         economic or financial interest of the Union or of a Member State, including monetary, budgetary and taxation a
         matters, public health and social security;

     (f) the protection of judicial independence and judicial proceedings;

     (g) the prevention, investigation, detection and prosecution of breaches of ethics for regulated professions;

     (h) a monitoring, inspection or regulatory function connected, even occasionally, to the exercise of official authority in
         the cases referred to in points (a) to (e) and (g);

     (i) the protection of the data subject or the rights and freedoms of others;

     (j) the enforcement of civil law claims.

     2.    In particular, any legislative measure referred to in paragraph 1 shall contain specific provisions at least, where
     relevant, as to:

     (a) the purposes of the processing or categories of processing;

     (b) the categories of personal data;

     (c) the scope of the restrictions introduced;

     (d) the safeguards to prevent abuse or unlawful access or transfer;

     (e) the specification of the controller or categories of controllers;

     (f) the storage periods and the applicable safeguards taking into account the nature, scope and purposes of the
         processing or categories of processing;

     (g) the risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects; and

     (h) the right of data subjects to be informed about the restriction, unless that may be prejudicial to the purpose of the
         restriction.


                                                              CHAPTER IV

                                                       Controller and processor

                                                              Sec ti on 1

                                                       G e ner a l o bl iga tio ns

                                                               Article 24

                                                  Responsibility of the controller

     1.   Taking into account the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing as well as the risks of varying likelihood
     and severity for the rights and freedoms of natural persons, the controller shall implement appropriate technical and
     organisational measures to ensure and to be able to demonstrate that processing is performed in accordance with this
     Regulation. Those measures shall be reviewed and updated where necessary.

     2.   Where proportionate in relation to processing activities, the measures referred to in paragraph 1 shall include the
     implementation of appropriate data protection policies by the controller.

     3.    Adherence to approved codes of conduct as referred to in Article 40 or approved certification mechanisms as
     referred to in Article 42 may be used as an element by which to demonstrate compliance with the obligations of the
     controller.
