                       Law & Compliance in AI Security & Data Protection


21 GDPR allows data subjects to object to processing altogether. These rights mean
different things, and each has their own exceptions and conditions for application.
However, their application to AI systems and models faces similar obstacles.
Those obstacles are likely to appear when the data subject attempts to exercise their
right to restrict (or object to) the use of their data in the training of AI systems and
models. First, a data subject might not even be aware that their data is being used for
training. The transparency measures studied in Unit 11 of this training module are
meant, among other things, to reduce this risk.
Additionally, a data subject might not have direct access to the organization training the
model or the system. For example, a patient of InnovaHospital might know that the
hospital is using for diagnosis an AI system based on a model developed by a third-
party provider. If a patient wants to object to the use of their data for training the model,
the hospital must not use that data for training (or fine-tuning the model), and it must
make sure that the developer organization will not use it for training.
Things become more complicated for that data subject when the AI model is not trained
on data that is specific to an organization. In that case, as discussed in Unit 6 of the
training module, the organization using the model is unlikely to have control over the
training process. Data subjects will need to exercise their right to restrict (or to object)
against the organization training the model.
Rights to rectification and erasure
Another set of data subject rights refers to the contents of data. Data subjects can
request that controllers address inaccuracies7 or even delete8 personal data concerning
them. The conditions, exceptions, and complications related to the exercise of those
rights have been extensively discussed elsewhere. But, once again, their
implementation becomes more complicated when it comes to the training of an AI
system.
The challenge, here, is that many AI systems do not represent information in the same
way as traditional computer systems. It is rarely the case that a particular piece of
information is stored in a single place within the system. Instead, data about an
individual is often dispersed across billions (or more) of parameters within a neural
network.9 Changing or removing that information, therefore, is not a matter as simple as
making a change to an entry on a database.
Yet, data controllers remain obliged to rectify and erase personal data whenever those
rights are applicable. If they fail to do so, data protection authorities can wield a variety


7 Article 16 GDPR
8 Article 17 GDPR>
9 See, e.g., Binns (2022).


                                             135
