                                Unit 10. Fairness and Accountability


controllers are not bound by this requirement. Still, they should consider documenting
those decisions, especially those that create (or address) more risk.
The second type of documentation that is relevant for AI systems refers to a system’s
instructions for use. When an organization provider an AI system, it makes certain
assumptions about the purposes for which their system might be used and how
somebody might use the system for those ends. Even if a provider does its part in
anticipating risks,4 the system might still cause harm if the deployers ignore the
measures and safeguards put in place to address risk. For example, if the university
UNw inputs personal data about students in a public chatbot that uses that data for
training, some of that personal data might become accessible to other users of the
chatbot. Following the instructions for use is an organizational measure to mitigate risk.
Finally, an organization might want to document the results of system operation:
    -   For a provider, this might mean keeping a paper trail of the software testing it
        conducts5 and the results of any audits,6 as well as any bug reports received from
        its customers afterwards.
    -   For a deployer, responsibility entails keeping track of what happens during
        system operation, to contact providers, affected parties, and the relevant
        authorities in case of harm.
As previously discussed, the AI Act creates specific requirements in this regard for high-
risk AI systems.7 But the responsibility to follow results is already present in data
protection law. So, it applies regardless of risk level.
Best practices in AI system documentation
Documentation does not exist for the sole purpose of compliance. It also plays a variety
of other roles in software. Some types of documents help software developers in
upgrading and maintaining existent systems, while others help prospective buyers make
sense of the tool. In some applications, there might even be an interest in making
information about the system accessible to the public. For example, the use of AI in
public-facing applications might be made more legitimate by making clear to the public
the role of the AI system. Accordingly, we will now consider some best practices for
documentation.
One best practice is to ensure that documentation is comprehensive and structured.
This means clearly defining sections within documents to address several aspects of the
AI system, such as data sources, processing methods, model performance, and ethical
considerations. By adopting a standardized structure, organizations can facilitate easier

4 See Unit 9 of this training module.
5 See Session 7.2 of this training module.
6 See Session 7.3 of this training module.
7 See Session 9.2 of this training module.


                                                166
