                                  Unit 5. Inception Stage


Prohibited AI applications
Article 5(1) AI Act establishes a list of prohibited AI practices. In some cases, those
practices are themselves illegal or at least questionable, but the addition of AI would
have the potential to amplify the harms. One such prohibition is that of Article 5(1)(a),
which bans the use of AI to materially distort the behaviour of a person or group of
persons in a way that causes or is likely to cause them to harm themselves or others.
This means, for instance, that an application that uses AI to incite conflicts within a
society is likely to be unlawful.
Other prohibitions deal with practices that are not in themselves unlawful but become
risky when done at the scale enabled by AI. For example, the AI Act bans the use of
emotion inference systems in the workplace or in educational institutions.7 This
provision also illustrates another feature of the AI Act’s system of prohibitions: they
sometimes allow for exceptions. In this case, the use of emotion inference systems is
allowed when the system is intended to be put in place or into the market for medical or
safety reasons. Those exceptions can be quite big, as shown by the fact that most of
Article 5 AI Act is dedicated to laying down conditions in which law enforcement can use
real-time biometric identification systems that are theoretically prohibited by Article
5(1)(h). But, without such an exception, no number of technical safeguards can allow
the lawful use of a system covered by Article 5.
High-risk AI systems
The AI Act distinguishes between two types of high-risk AI systems. Some systems are
classified as such because they are used in products that are, in themselves, subject to
harmonized product safety law at the EU level. Others are classified as such because
the EU lawmaker has deemed that the risks they create to fundamental rights,
democracy, and the rule of law are big enough to warrant special attention. For the most
part, those two kinds of high-risk AI systems are largely subject to the same rules. Still,
there are a few differences between the classification procedures applicable to each
one.
Product safety law
When it comes to systems already covered by product safety law, Article 6(1) AI Act
establishes two conditions for the high-risk classification.
The first condition relates to the intended purpose of the system: the system must be a
product covered by the product safety legislation listed in Annex I AI Act, or a safety
component of such a product. For example, the toys produced by DigiToys are
regulated by the Toy Safety Directive,8 and so they meet this first requirement. Likewise,
if InnovaHospital decides to incorporate AI into medical devices, those devices might be

7 Article 5(1)(f) AI Act.
8 Directive 2009/48/EC.


                                             82
