                       Law & Compliance in AI Security & Data Protection


significant privacy risks due to the potential for affecting individuals’ legal rights. As
such, they are likely to require a data protection assessment, even if the use of AI in tax
is explicitly excluded from the AI Act’s definition of “law enforcement.” This example
illustrates that the AI Act can offer a guideline to the application of Article 35 GDPR, but
it does not replace a data controller’s careful evaluation of the context.
When conducting DPIAs for high-risk AI systems, deployers must integrate information
provided by the developer.13 At the very least, this means deployers should use the
developer-provided instructions for use, which often outline the AI system’s operational
parameters, limitations, and specific conditions for safe use. This information is critical
for understanding how the system might impact data subjects and for identifying
appropriate safeguards that align with GDPR’s accountability standards.
DPIA during the AI development process
The AI Act does not create a similar obligation for providers. That is, organizations
developing high-risk AI systems are not obliged to incorporate into the DPIA any
information they obtain from upstream providers. Nonetheless, those organizations are
likely to need to carry out a DPIA themselves. This is because any processing of
personal data in the training process is likely to meet the requirements from Article 35(1)
GDPR:
    -   If such processing occurs, its goal is to create a system that, by definition, poses
        a high risk to the rights and freedoms of the natural persons affected by the
        system.14 As such, the risk criterion is likely to be met for the training process.
    -   The training of an AI system is, at least for the time being, an operation involving
        novel technologies. In the future, when techniques for training AI mature enough,
        this might no longer be the case.
    -   Many AI systems are trained with the use of personal data. Whenever that is the
        case, the training might fall within the scope of the GDPR.15
Considering these factors, a provider developing an AI system will likely need to conduct
a DPIA before they can commercialize that system or put into service. As they do so,
they might benefit from the information made available in their own technical
documentation. Additionally, they might want to use information obtained from their own
providers. For example, InnovaHospital might want to refer to ChatGPT’s documentation
as it assesses a chatbot that uses this model. Doing so will allow an organization to see
the bigger picture of risks associated with a system.
Likewise, developers of general-purpose AI models trained on personal data would do
well to carry out a DPIA before placing their products on the market. If a general-

13 As mandated by Article 26 AI Act.
14 Which are not necessarily the same persons whose data is being processed.
15 See Unit 6 of this training module.


                                                169
